# delphiniumExaltatum

This code supports an analysis lead by Rebecca Mohn et al. (2021) on the historical biogeography of Delphinium exaltatum, an endangered plant in the eastern United States. Specifically, this code constructs several sets of ecological niche models (ENMs) and hindcasts them to the last glacial maximum, ~21 Kypb. The output is a series of suitability maps spaced every 500 yr across this period. The maps can be used to infer the timing of genetic divergence between now-disjunct populations, as well as the location of putative refugia.

Mohn, R. A., Oleas, N. H., Smith, A. B., Swift, J. F., Yatskievych, G. A., & Edwards, C. E. (2021). The phylogeographic history of a range disjunction in Eastern North America: The role of post‐glacial expansion into newly suitable habitat. American Journal of Botany, 108(6), 1042-1057. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajb2.1686

**Abstract**. **Aim**—Approximately 75 North American plant species have geographic ranges exhibiting a ~650 km disjunction between the Ozark and Appalachian Regions. Biogeographic forces proposed to have caused this disjunction include: 1) Eocene‐Oligocene vicariance by the formation of the Mississippi embayment, 2) Pleistocene vicariance from interglacial flooding, 3) post-Pleistocene northward colonization from multiple glacial refugia, 4) hypsithermal vicariance due to climate fluctuations, and 5) recent long-distance dispersal. We used phylogeography and ecological niche modeling to investigate which of these hypothesized pathways most likely gave rise to the Appalachian-Ozark disjunction in Delphinium exaltatum Aiton.

**Methods**—We genotyped populations of D. exaltatum from five Ozark and seven Appalachian localities, analyzed genetic structure, tested the order and timing of divergences using DIYABC, and conducted niche reconstructions up to 21,000 years before present (YBP).

**Key Results**—Populations were separated into four main genetic clusters: a “highland” group in the central Appalachians, and three “lowland” groups. The highland and lowland lineages most likely diverged since 14,300-17,000 YBP, and the lowland lineages diverged nearly simultaneously around 6,800-10,900 YBP. Niche reconstructions showed that suitable climate for the highland experienced large spatial discontinuity starting 14,000 YBP, so divergence and persistence before this period is less plausible than divergence thereafter.

**Conclusions**—Our results did not fully support any of the traditional hypotheses. Rather, the oldest genetic divergence occurred around 8,000-16,000 YBP, likely through adaptive expansion into newly opened habitat in the Appalachians. The Appalachian-Ozark disjunction likely resulted from northward dispersal of the lowland lineage as the climate warmed during the Holocene.  
